JUDY WOODRUFF: Next, to
part one of my interview
with Warren Buffett.
He's one of the shrewdest and
most successful investors in
the world, earning the nickname
the Oracle of Omaha.
I traveled to Nebraska
last week for this
wide-ranging conversation.
And a note: Buffett is CBO of
Berkshire Hathaway, which owns
BNSF Railway, one of the funders
of the "NewsHour."
He's number two on Forbes'
list of the world's
wealthiest people, worth
more than $75 billion.
Warren Buffett is an
investing rock star to
his Berkshire Hathaway
shareholders, who gather
in Omaha every year.
One share is trading
today at $251,000.
Two years ago, the legendary
firm celebrated its record of
investment over a half-century,
a portfolio that includes Kraft
Heinz, Geico, Wells Fargo,
Coca-Cola and, among others,
the Nebraska Furniture Mart.
It's the largest furniture
store in North America.
Buffet bought it in 1983
from Rose Blumkin, a
Russian immigrant who
built it from nothing.
WARREN BUFFETT, Chairman
and CEO, Berkshire Hathaway:
There's nothing like it.
And we're the 58th market in the
United States, and this was the
largest home furnishing store
in the country, until
we built two more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why
was she so successful?
What was the secret?
WARREN BUFFETT: She would say --
she had a thing in her office,
which you probably couldn't
read, but it says she
had two things, sell
cheap and tell the truth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We talked on the
showroom floor surrounded by
sofas, lamps and coffee tables.
The state of the economy
was our first topic.
The stock market's booming.
Unemployment rate is,
what, is as low as it's
been in 15, 16 years.
But we're still not
seeing the growth that
people would like to see.
What's going on?
WARREN BUFFETT: The economy
is doing well, but all
Americans aren't doing well.
But we have got $57,000 or
$58,000 of GDP per person.
That is a lot of stuff.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And yet
the growth, the rate of
growth is, what, 2 percent.
WARREN BUFFETT: Yes, 2 percent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Trump
is saying we're going to get
it up a lot higher than that.
Is that doable?
WARREN BUFFETT: Well, it may
be occasionally it happens.
But, no, I don't think
probably on average we will
have that kind of growth.
But 2 percent does
wonders for you, Judy.
If you take 2 percent,
we have a half-a-percent
population growth, and we
have a little immigration,
but 2 percent in one generation
will add $19,000 of GDP per
person, family of four, $76,000
in one generation.
So, your children and
your children's children
and all that, they
will live far, far, far
better than we live
with 2 percent growth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let me
then ask you a little bit about
the employment picture, because
it is, as you ISIS
, low unemployment.
People -- a lot of
people have jobs.
At the same time, we're
told the labor participation
rate is lower than what
the experts like it
to be.
WARREN BUFFETT: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: More people are
leaving jobs than are joining.
Are we seeing some
kind of shift?
WARREN BUFFETT: Well, we always
see shifts in employment.
If you think about it, if you go
back to 1800, it took 80 percent
of the labor force to produce
enough food for the country.
Now it takes less
than 3 percent.
Well, the truth is that market
systems move people around.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You also see,
though, some experts saying
that not enough -- there aren't
enough workers out there who
know -- who have the skills to
do all the jobs that are needed.
WARREN BUFFETT: Well,
there's always a mismatch.
I mean, you know, as
the economy evolves, it
reallocates resources.
Now, the real problem, in my
view, is -- this has been -- the
prosperity has been unbelievable
for the extremely rich people.
If you go to 1982, when Forbes
put on their first 400 list,
those people had $93 billion.
They now they have $2.4
trillion, 25 for one.
That is -- this has
been a prosperity that's
been disproportionately
rewarding to the people
on top.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are we
stuck forever with some
measure inequality?
WARREN BUFFETT: No, we generally
have translated greater output
in the few hours of work per
week over the last century.
And that's a good
trend of the future.
But we do have to have a system
that, as output of goods and
services keeps increasing per
capita, that it takes care of
the people who are willing to
work and really are not getting
by very well with a
family on a 40-hour week.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You come
across as optimistic about
the future of this country.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think you
wrote to your shareholders
last year it's been a
mistake to bet against
the United States for
the last 240 years.
Has the U.S. standing, though,
in the world been -- has it
been changed, has it been harmed
in any way, given what's
been going on for the
last six or eight months?
WARREN BUFFETT: We do not
have quite the percentage
of the world's GDP
that we had 20 or 30 or
40 years ago, but
we're still the leader.
The question is whether we
can be the moral leader, as
well as the economic leader.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
what do you think?
WARREN BUFFETT: Well,
I think that's a podium
that we should have.
We will be the economic
leader, and we should
be the moral leader.
We should stand for more
than the fact that we're
the wealthiest country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And do you
think we are right now?
WARREN BUFFETT: Well, sometimes,
we are and sometimes we aren't.
(LAUGHTER)
WARREN BUFFETT: I didn't think
what happened on the Paris
agreement was a good idea.
We have to live with
the rest of the world.
And it's a mistake, in my view.
Trade has generally
developed in this country.
We actually export 12 or
13 percent of our GDP.
It was only 5 percent in 1970.
But it benefits us.
It benefits the
rest of the world.
It doesn't benefit the
steelworker maybe in Ohio.
And that's the problem that has
to be addressed, because when
you have something that's good
for society, but terribly
harmful for given individuals,
we have got to make sure those
individuals are taken care of.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me ask
you about a couple questions
about markets, investing.
I mean, nobody knows
markets better than you do.
I think you said earlier this
year that you weren't worried
that the market was in a bubble,
because interest rates
were staying low.
As you know, the Federal Reserve
is starting to raise them.
Do you still feel the
market is not in a bubble?
WARREN BUFFETT: Well, anything
can happen in markets.
I bought my first stock in
1942, in the summer of '42.
I was 11 years old.
And so 75 years have gone by.
And I have never known
what the market's going
to do the next day.
And that's not my game.
My game is to decide whether
I'm in the right economy, which
America's definitely been ever
since that time.
The Dow has gone from
121000 during that time.
And no matter what the headlines
say, or terrible things are
happening -- we were losing the
war in the Pacific when
I first bought stocks.
So, America's going
to do fine over time.
America business is going
Occasionally, we go off the
tracks with bubbles like -- and
a lot of human error and that
sort of thing.
But it will never
permanently derail us.
And I don't try and guess when
to get in and out of the market.
I have owned stocks
consistently since 1942.
I owned the -- I was
buying stocks the day
before the election.
I was buying the same stocks
the day after election.
And if Hillary had been
elected, it would have
been the same thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Does President
Trump deserve credit for what
is going on right now in the
market?
WARREN BUFFETT: I -- the
stock market has been going up
basically since March of 2009.
That's when it hit the
bottom, very early in March.
It's been going up more
or less ever since then.
But if I ever get elected
president, I will never claim
credit for anything the market
does, because I don't
want to be blamed when it
goes the other direction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Your investment
decisions over time have been
remarkably right much of the
time, most of the time.
Today, as people look at you
and look at the decisions that
you have made, what mainly
should people take a look at?
WARREN BUFFETT: They should
be willing to bet on America.
They shouldn't listen to a lot
of jabbering about what the
market's going to do tomorrow
or next week or next month,
because nobody knows.
They should just keep buying
and buying and buying a little
bit of America as they go
along.
And 30 or 40 years from now,
they will have a lot of money.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Berkshire
Hathaway has made a huge
investment in Wells Fargo.
WARREN BUFFETT: True.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you
-- it came up at your
recent shareholders
meeting that Wells Fargo
had problems.
They engaged in some...
WARREN BUFFETT:
Plenty of problems.
JUDY WOODRUFF:
They engaged in some fake
accounts, in millions
of fake accounts.
The leadership of the
company was replaced.
WARREN BUFFETT: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The critics are
saying, yes, you called them
out, but Berkshire Hathaway
still owns a big
chunk of Wells Fargo.
WARREN BUFFETT: Sure.
Sure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And
they're saying, is
there a double standard?
WARREN BUFFETT: It was
a terrible mistake.
They incentivized bad behavior.
Incentives work, but they
work -- you incentivize good
behavior or bad behavior.
And then the problem,
big problem is -- and
sometimes will you -- you
can design an incentive
system that is incentivizing
the wrong things.
You have got to end it, and
end it fast and decisive.
So, that's where they
made the big mistake.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there a clear
line in your mind when behavior
becomes just so unacceptable
that you don't want
to have anything to
do with that company?
WARREN BUFFETT: Well, it's
a very interesting question.
I wouldn't want to
manufacture cigarettes.
But if I owned -- we
do own ÑMDNMÑCostco.
Do they sell them?
Yes.
So I don't have a problem
owning stock in that.
But I just wouldn't want to --
I wouldn't want to do it myself.
I basically think, if
anything is sufficiently
antisocial, society
should do something about
it.
But that's a separate question.
But -- and I don't think
there's any company that I have
seen that's 100 percent pure.
In terms of what I will call
them out for, I will call
individuals out, but generally
I would not apply that
to the corporation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Something that
affects all businesses is the
cost of health care in this
country.
WARREN BUFFETT: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you
have been vocal about that.
You have argued that, right
now, in effect, that the cost
of paying for health care can
affect a company
even more than taxes.
WARREN BUFFETT: Well, it
does, I mean, in terms of our
competitiveness in the world.
Health care in 1960
was 5 percent of GDP.
And there's only 100
cents in the dollar.
So, it's gone from 5 cents
-- 5 percent to 17 percent.
And it keeps going up.
Corporate taxes have gone down
from 4 percent to 2 percent.
So, corporate taxes are
way less of a factor in
American competitiveness
than -- I'm talking
about overall business
-- than medical costs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And as
we sit here today in
Omaha, the Republicans
in Congress are madly
trying to figure out what
to do to replace Obamacare,
the Affordable Care Act.
WARREN BUFFETT: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you
have a firm idea in your
mind of what ought to
be done about Obamacare?
Everybody acknowledges there
have been some problems with it.
WARREN BUFFETT: I think
that's way outside of
my circle of competence.
But I would say this.
You can't have that 5 go to
17 and move on to 20 and 22
or 24 percent, because there
are only 100 cents in a dollar.
And health care is gobbling up
well over $3 trillion a year.
It's just about the same
as federal -- the federal
budget is getting up there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Are we now at
the point where the country
does need to think about some
sort of single-payer system
in some form or another?
WARREN BUFFETT: With my
limited knowledge, I think that
probably is the best system,
because it is a system --
we are such a rich country.
In a sense, we can
afford to do it.
But in almost every field
of American business, it
pays to bring down costs.
There's an awful lot of people
involved in the medical --
the whole -- just the way the
ecosystem works, that
there is no incentive
to bring down costs.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it
sounds like you're saying,
with a single-payer
system, it would be easier
to figure out a way to
get those costs down.
WARREN BUFFETT: It would
be more effective, I think.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And tune in
tomorrow night for the second
part of my conversation with
Warren Buffett.
We will look then more at his
own taxes and his views on
tax reform and philanthropy.
Online, you can view Buffett's
very first tax return, filed
when he just 14 years old
for money he earned delivering
newspapers in his then Northwest
Washington, D.C., neighborhood.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.